[Music]
if someone asked you what the oldest
city in the world was you might give a
lot of different answers your first
guess might be Athens or Rome or maybe
somewhere in ancient Egypt all great
guesses but when it comes to age none of
them hold a candle to the nine thousand
year old settlement recently found just
outside the town of matzah Israel a
quick five mile drive from the capital
city of Jerusalem our journey of
discovery begins as all the best ones do
with a highway in the desert this is no
dark and abandoned stretch of road full
of coyotes and spooky hotels but rather
a brand new interchange intended to
relieve congestion in the busy Jerusalem
metropolitan area workers from Israel's
national transport infrastructure
company discovered this site while
excavating the network of tunnels that
would connect the new road to a nearby
highway and notify the Israel
Antiquities Authority of what they'd
found little did anyone realize they
nearly paved over one of the most
significant archaeological finds of this
decade people have been living in the
Middle East for tens of thousands of
years long before they arrived in Europe
eastern Asia or the Americas but until
recently there hadn't been any evidence
of major prehistoric settlements in that
part of Israel now there's not only
evidence of an agricultural society
having existed in the region but with an
estimated population of up to 3,000 it
would have been the Stone Age equivalent
of a major metropolis while these aren't
necessarily the oldest ruins in that
part of the world no one could have
expected to find a major city in a place
that was supposed to have been almost
entirely uninhabited if you still don't
see why this is so important
imagine finding Atlantis off the coast
of Miami kind of a big deal right well
that example might be a bit extreme the
discovery that people were not
living in that part of the country but
had organized a complex society
thousands of years earlier than we
thought is a huge discovery in fact it's
such a big deal to researchers that one
expert working at the dig called it the
archaeological equivalent of the Big
Bang now hold on some of you might be
saying doesn't that seem like a bit much
it's still just a bunch of Stone Age
Hut's nothing to get too worked up about
after all it's not like they had roads
and temples and mother of pearl jewelry
right well my oddly specific friend the
inhabitants of this lost city had all of
that and more while words like Stone Age
and prehistoric might bring to mind
Harry Neanderthals chucking Spears at
mammoths and sleeping in caves
these ancient Israelis were much more
advanced than that while the city's
inhabitants lived thousands of years
before the invention of written language
that didn't prevent them from having a
complex society with a rich culture and
system of beliefs far from being a
collection of huts the settlement
consists of several hundred stone and
plaster buildings that included
everything from houses and marketplaces
to temples and tombs there's even
evidence that some buildings may have
featured primitive forms of insulation
and waterproofing and if that isn't
impressive enough many of the houses are
laid out along what appears to have been
a predetermined grid of streets and
alleyways a display of City Planning
that would put many ancient empires to
shame to archeologists this suggests a
complex system of government thousands
of years before the construction of
Stonehenge and what did they find in
these ruins
well we already mentioned they had
jewelry and tools made from a variety of
materials many of which are not
naturally occurring in that region of
Israel well some of the stone used in
both jewelry and decoration is still
waiting to be identified the presence of
materials like mother-of-pearl and
obsidian suggests the city was a major
trade hub exchanging goods with people
as far away as modern-day Turkey
now if you don't like driving to the
supermarket on a workday imagine
crossing over a thousand miles of desert
and mountains a few thousand years
before horses were domesticated despite
the ruins proximity to modern Jerusalem
the artifacts of this forgotten city are
remarkably well-preserved
allowing archaeologists to gain insight
into a society that left no written
history among the recovered antiquities
were a variety of ceramic items
including not only pottery but several
small human and animal figurines
archeologists believe many of these have
served a ritual purpose possibly
depicting some manner of deities or
spirits particularly noteworthy are the
contents of numerous burial sites
scattered throughout the residential
portions of the city not unlike the
tombs of Egyptian pharaohs and Viking
raiders these burial chambers contained
a variety of tools and valuables not
only does this reinforce the idea that
the people who live there had their own
system of traditions in addition to art
and jewelry other finds include a
variety of stone and bronze weapons and
tools such as axes and arrowheads as
well as knives and farm tools of varying
shapes and sizes we even have a pretty
good idea of what these people ate
thanks to the astonishingly
well-preserved contents of storage sheds
and greeneries scattered around the city
in addition to finding an unheard-of
number of petrified lentil seeds there's
evidence that the local diet included
things like chickpeas and sheep and the
occasional game animal and this is
starting to make me hungry I might need
to grab lunch after we finish recording
this I wonder if I can find a place that
serves lamb with chickpeas around here
well my meal plans aside a stable source
of food was critical in keeping a
complex society on its feet animal bones
found nearby have led researchers to
believe that the city's first
inhabitants were hunter-gatherers that
arrived in the region sometime around
10,000 years ago as centuries past
they gradually moved away from their
nomadic lifestyles and reliance on
wandering animal herds within a thousand
years not very long
relatively speaking this small tribe of
hunters had become a bustling city as
for how they managed this geography did
the early settlers more than a few
favors in establishing themselves when
most Westerners think of the Middle East
we think of barren mountains and empty
deserts while Israel has no shortage of
sand there are also plenty of inland
waterways around which societies were
able to form a reliable source of water
allowed their society transition from
hunter-gatherer to farmers creating a
stable source of food experts say this
led to something of a golden age in the
last few hundred years of the city's
existence as it grew to its fullest size
and began trading farther afield
well geologists have a surprisingly
clear picture of life in this
prehistoric settlement there's a lot we
still don't know about the people who
lived in it we don't know what language
they spoke the specifics of their belief
system or even what they called
themselves any history or legends would
have been passed down orally and with
9,000 years between them and us it's
likely those stories have been lost to
the centuries still studying places like
this can teach us a lot about our
earliest ancestors and if this city
could remain hidden for so long
imagine what else might still be out
there waiting to be uncovered
speaking of discoveries Israeli
authorities recently recovered a stolen
mask dating from around the same period
this eerie artifact originated from a
site about 18 miles further south near
the city of Hebron and for an ancient
piece of rock it's had a pretty exciting
journey in early 2018 the mask was
stolen by looters who tried to sell it
on the black market this illegal sale
was reported to the Israel Antiquities
authorities antiquities theft prevention
unit a special task force that
investigates unauthorized excavations
like this one
after a brief but thorough investigation
the ATP you boy that's easier to say
apprehended the looter and recovered
this valuable if strange-looking
artifact the mask itself is car from
polished limestone and engraved with
subtle details like teeth and even
cheekbones archaeologists believe the
mask one of only 15 of its kind played
an essential role in the belief systems
of the people who inhabited the region
9,000 years ago
and may have been carved in the likeness
of a respected ancestor the bright side
to the masks adventure wink-wink is that
not only has it been recovered but
instead of sitting untouched in a
private collection like many similar
artifacts it's being examined by
archaeologists eager to learn more about
its mysterious creators so the next time
you're out in the woods maybe not even
that far from home keep an eye on what's
around you that pile of rocks may not be
anything at all or it might just be the
key to unlocking one of history's
mysteries or it might be a pile of rocks
anyway has this story inspired you to
grab your shovel and Fedora and start
exploring hey Indiana
do you have a favorite lost civilization
let me know down in the comments I
always love to hear from you and if you
liked this video don't forget to give it
a thumbs up and share it with your
friends hit that subscribe button if you
haven't already and stay on brightside
for more videos just like this one
really